Under the covers by adding the starter dependencies,
all the required Spring Security dependencies for
OAuth2 client are sourced for you.
So you don't have to go hunt them down yourself.
Because this is an MVC web application, Spring Boot plugged in a servlet filter,
the delegating filter chain proxy, into the embedded Tomcat web server.
If your typical Spring MVC application,
requests are routed to the dispatcher servlet,
which in turn routes them to the appropriate servlets to be actioned.
In order to secure these requests, Spring Boot adds a Spring Security filter,
the delegating filter chain proxy.
This sits in front of the servlets and intercepts all requests
to perform the security tasks and checks before allowing them
to be actioned by the servlets.
The delegated filter chain proxy delegates the request to a FilterChainProxy,
which in turn assigns them to the appropriate SecurityFilterChain.
Now filter chains are simply collections of filters that perform
the security tasks and checks on the requests.
You could have multiple filter chains in your application that
specialize in dealing with different requests.
Example,
you could require that all requests to the admin URL use digest
authentication while all other requests use basic authentication.
Hence, you would configure two filter chains,
one with a DigestAuthenticationFilter with a request matcher for the
admin URL and another filter chain with a BasicAuthenticationFilter and
a request matcher for all the other URLs.
As the requests come in,
the delegating filter will route them to the appropriate
filter chain for the security checks.
And only once the request passes the security checks is it
allowed to proceed to the dispatcher servlet.
To see this in action,
let's put a breakpoint into the FilterChainProxy and see the
filter chains that Spring Boot configured.
Now there are three filter chains.
The first two we can just ignore.
They just catch requests to the /css, the /webjars URL and simply do nothing.
It's because in our existing demo app, Configuration,
we instructed Spring Security to ignore those paths as,
by default, Spring Security blocks everything,
and we want our unsecured pages like the registration and
login to also be styled and have JavaScript even though
the user's not authenticated.
Now the third filter chain handles all our configured
authentication and authorization.
It has three key filters,
the username and password authentication filter because our application still
has its own form login configured and both the OAuth2LoginAuthenticationFilter
and OAuth2AuthorizationRequestRedirectFilter.
Now these two handle the OAuth2 authorization code grant flow.
If we use our select sign-in with an OAuth2 provider,
like Google or Facebook,
the browser will send the request to the OAuth2 authorization URI with
the provider's registrationId as a path variable.
In our case, it would be in either Facebook or Google.
This request will then be intercepted by the
OAuth2AuthorizationRequestRedirectFilter,
which will generate the redirect URI for the authorization server,
which would include the CLIENT_ID, the requested scopes,
in this case openid, to indicate we want the OpenID Connect flow,
the response_type, indicating we want the authorization code grants,
and optionally a unique state nonce.
It will also cache this request in the user's session for future validations
once Google and Facebook respond back to check the state nonce.
Now the redirect requests will be sent via the user's browser.
This is known as a front channel request.
The browser will then forward it to the authorization provider,
in this case either Google or Facebook.
The provider can now look up the client ID,
authenticate the user,
and ask if they consent to provide the client with the requested scopes.
If the user agrees,
the provider sends a redirect request to the user's browser using the
redirect URI provided in the initial request from the client,
this time to the login/oauth2/code endpoint on the client.
The authorization server will include an authorization code and the state nonce.
Now on the client,
this time the OAuth2LoginAuthenticationFilter will intercept the request.
It will first validate the request by retrieving the state nonce from the
session and comparing it against the one in the request.
This is to protect against cross-site request forgery,
then delegate to the AuthenticationManager to perform the actual authentication.
The manager will consult with its authentication providers.
Now there are many flavors of authentication providers depending on
the grant type or if it's OpenID Connect or OAuth2.
Now for the authorization code grant,
the provider first exchanges the authorization code for the
access token and optionally a refresh token from the token
endpoint on the authentication server.
You will also need to include the client-id and secret,
by default, in the basic authentication header.
If the OpenID Connect scope was included,
then it will also retrieve an ID token.
It will then validate the token returned.
Now once validated,
it needs to call the userinfo endpoint to retrieve
all the resource owner's claims.
To do this, it uses a user service, which come in two flavors,
an OAuth2 version and an OpenID Connect version.
The user service uses the access token against the userinfo endpoint,
retrieves the claims,
and packages them up into an OAuth2 or OpenID Connect user object,
returning that back to the provider.
The authentication provider then maps the scopes into granted
authorities and packages up the user object,
granted authorities,
etc., into an authentication object of type OAuth2LoginAuthenticationToken,
returning that back to the AuthenticationManager,
which then forwards it back to the OAuth2LoginAuthenticationFilter.
The filter will add the authentication to the security
context held in the SecurityContextHolder.
The holders is a thread local,
so you can access it anywhere in your code to
achieve the authenticated principal.
Now additionally, the filter will create an OAuth2 authorization client object,
which encapsulates the client metadata, like the token endpoint,
userinfo endpoint, client-secret, and the validated tokens,
like the access, refresh, or ID token,
and then stores this object in the OAuth2AuthorizedClientService,
which you can then wire into any of your classes if you need to retrieve
the authorized client in case you need any of the tokens.
Perhaps you want to use the refresh token to get a new access token or ID token.
Now if we drill into the filters in debug mode,
we can browse for all the components set up for us by Spring Boot,
like the OAuth2LoginAuthenticationFilter.
You can see its AuthenticationManager,
and you can see it has the OpenID and OAuth2 providers user services.
And all these were set up with just a few lines of configuration.
Next,
we will see how Spring Boot configured everything and its
decision- making process as you will need to customize and
override these decisions to tailor the framework to your application's unique security requirements.